Welcome to the next
week of our course
on parallel functional
programming with Java.
Now that we've covered the
Java streams and fork-join
frameworks, it's time
to turn our attention
to the final topic of
the course, the Java
completable futures
framework, which
supports a reactive
programming model that's
responsive, resilient,
elastic, and message-driven.
In parallel streams examples
we've examined in prior weeks,
the behaviors running
in aggregate operations
have all been synchronous, which
means that the behavior borrows
the thread in which
it runs from its color
and does not return control
until its computations are
done.
For example, each call to
the searchForWord method
in the ParallelSearchStreamGang
variance
blocks the color
until it finishes
examining its input
string to determine
if there are any matches.
There are pros and cons of
using synchronous calls.
On the pro side,
synchronous calls
are intuitive and easy to
program since they map cleanly
onto two-way method
invocation and return patterns
that we've all used to write
conventional object-oriented
programs.
On the con side, however,
synchronous calls often
don't effectively
leverage the parallelism
inherent in multicore systems.
For example, selecting the
right number of threads
to allocate for
synchronous calls
is hard since selecting too
many threads waste memory
and processing resources,
but selecting too few threads
can degrade performance.
The Java completable
features framework
overcomes these synchronous
processing limitations
by triggering dependent
actions upon the completion
of asynchronous operations.
Completable futures can
be used in conjunction
with thread pools to run
multiple asynchronous
operations in parallel
as well as process
their results in parallel.
By default, completable
futures framework
runs operations asynchronously
in the common fork-join pool.
However, this framework
can also be instructed
to run asynchronous operations
in other predefined or
user-defined thread pools
as long as they conform
to the Java executor
interface, which
is more flexible than Java
parallel streams framework
that's just limited to
the common fork-join pool.
The lessons this week
motivate the need
for the completable
futures framework
and give an overview
of its API, which
consists of over 60
public methods designed
to improve the
responsiveness, resilience,
and elasticity of Java
programs that leverage
its message-driven,
reactive, computing engine.